People with diabetes have
too much glucose—sugar—in their blood.
Glucose is a form of sugar.
It is formed from the breakdown of foods we eat,
especially carbohydrates.
After a meal, it is absorbed
from the intestines into the bloodstream.
Normally, the glucose binds to receptors
on cells in the pancreas,
which triggers the cells to release
a hormone called insulin into the bloodstream.
The insulin allows the glucose to be
transported from the blood into cells
for use as fuel.
Cells have an outer wall, or membrane,
which controls what goes in and out of the cell.
Insulin binds to receptors
on the cell membrane.
This activates protein molecules
on the membrane
that allow the glucose to enter the cell.
The cells can then use glucose as
energy to carry out their functions.
In people with type 1 diabetes,
no insulin is produced in response
to blood glucose levels.
People with type 2 diabetes
produce insulin
but their bodies don’t use it properly.
Without insulin, the cells can’t
easily access the calories in the glucose.
So even if a person eats a lot of food,
their cells may be starving.
And high blood sugar—called hyperglycemia
can have serious complications if it
occurs for an extended period of time.
It can result in damage to the
kidneys, nerves, heart, and eyes.
Very high blood sugar is a medical emergency.